Turkish lira plunges amid tensions with Washington
US ‘deeply concerned’ at reports that Ankara will test Russian air defence system

The Turkish lira hit a new low after the US warned it was “deeply concerned” at reports Turkey planned to test a Russian S-400 air defence system purchased from Moscow.

The embattled currency fell more than 1 per cent to 7.885 against the dollar following the strongly-worded statement from Washington, which sparked renewed concern among investors already nervous about the impact of a Joe Biden victory in US presidential elections on Turkey-US relations and rising tensions in the Caucasus. 

“We continue to object strenuously to Turkey’s purchase of the S-400 air defence system, and are deeply concerned with reports that Turkey is continuing its efforts to bring the S-400 into operation,” the US Department of State said. 

“We continue to stress at the highest levels that the S-400 transaction remains a major obstacle in the bilateral relationship and at NATO, as well as a risk for potential . . . sanctions.”

Earlier this year, Turkey quietly dropped a vow to activate the air defence system in April 2020 as the fallout from the coronavirus pandemic rocked the country’s financial markets.

But reports in recent days suggested the country’s military was planning to conduct tests near the Black Sea town of Sinop. Video footage shared by social media users showed trucks carrying the S-400 components towards the region. The Turkish defence ministry said it would not comment on the reports.


Eurasia Group, a political risk consultancy, said Turkey’s decision to test the S-400 marked “an effort to thaw frosty ties” with Russia. Despite forging close co-operation on energy, defence and trade, Ankara and Moscow have again found them on opposing sides of an international conflict in the disputed Caucasian region of Nagorno-Karabakh, where clashes have erupted over the past fortnight between Turkey-backed Azerbaijan and Russia-backed Armenia.

“[Turkey’s president Recep Tayyip] Erdogan will seek a compromise with [Russia’s leader Vladimir] Putin in the Caucasus after signalling robust Turkey-Russia co-operation with the S-400 drills despite NATO objections,” said Emre Peker, Eurasia group’s Europe director, in a note on Wednesday. 

But Aaron Stein, a Turkey expert at the Foreign Policy Research Institute, a US think-tank, said Ankara had always intended to activate the $2.5bn system, which it bought from Moscow with the help of Russian loans, despite initially putting it on hold because of US concerns.

“The system has always needed to be tested in Turkey,” he said, adding its alleged destination, Sinop, hosted Turkey’s missile facilities and so could indicate that a “provocative” missile test — which would further irk Washington — was imminent. 

“What better time to shoot one off than in the last 20 days of an election cycle? There’s probably not going to be a major US response until after January.”

	The US has long warned Nato ally Turkey of its opposition to the purchase of the Russian weaponry, which American officials say poses a threat to the security of the F-35 fifth-generation fighter jet, whose production was led by the US defence giant Lockheed Martin.

Turkey, which had signed a deal to purchase more than 100 F-35s, has been suspended from the programme in retaliation for its acquisition of the Russian S-400, striking a significant blow to the Turkish air force.

But US president Donald Trump, who has forged a close personal relationship with his Turkish counterpart Mr Erdogan, has shielded Ankara from other sanctions that were supposed to be imposed on Turkey under congressional legislation aimed at stymieing the Russian defence industry.

Some analysts believe that, if he wins next month’s US elections, Mr Biden will take a tougher stance against Mr Erdogan, who has caused alarm in Europe and the US over his increasingly aggressive foreign policy and his erosion of human rights at home. 

In a statement published on Wednesday, the Democratic candidate condemned Turkey’s “provocative actions” in the eastern Mediterranean, where Ankara has been engaged in a military stand-off with Greece over gas rights. He also called on Mr Erdogan to reverse a recent decision to convert Istanbul’s Hagia Sophia, a former cathedral that is seen as one of the greatest surviving examples of Byzantine architecture, from a museum into a mosque. 