	Fund groups urge UK to back EU green finance rules
Aviva Investors and Columbia Threadneedle warn that UK’s green finance goals are at risk if the country does not act


An organisation representing asset managers including Aviva Investors, Columbia Threadneedle and Hermes has urged the UK government to commit to the EU’s green finance rules after Brexit or risk falling behind Europe on sustainable investing.

The UK Sustainable Investment and Finance Association, whose asset manager, bank and financial adviser members oversee £7tn in assets, has written to the Treasury calling on it to publish its regulatory approach to responsible investing “at the earliest opportunity”.

UKSIF is concerned that the UK’s inaction on defining its sustainable finance rule book could compromise its credentials as a hub for social, governance and environmental investing.

Policymakers around the world are developing rule books for the ESG sector as they seek to channel more private capital into sustainable projects and combat the risk of greenwashing. Europe is at the forefront of this race with its landmark sustainable finance regulation, which is due to take force from March 2021.

Despite the UK stating it wants to match the aims of the EU regime, the country has not put forward any legislative proposals ahead of the end of the Brexit transition period in December. This increases the likelihood that the UK’s future framework will come into force later than the EU’s rule book.

The government faces a decision about how, and whether, it will maximise our [financial services and environmental] expertise

UKSIF
Criticisms of the Treasury’s inaction underline how the UK’s increasingly vocal aim of diverging from EU regulations after Brexit is creating frictions with the business community. Under Prime Minister Boris Johnson, the UK has become more adamant about its unwillingness to be a rule-taker, even in cases such as sustainable finance where it shares the same policy goals.

Ben Nelmes, head of public policy at UKSIF, warned that the UK’s reluctance to commit to the EU rules “heightened the risk that it will fall behind on sustainable finance”.

In a letter sent to City minister John Glen on Friday, UKSIF called on the government to fast-track the adoption of rules that are “at least as ambitious and [which do] not radically diverge” from the EU framework.

It said the government “faces a decision about how, and whether, it will maximise our [financial services and environmental] expertise, and honour its commitment to match the ambition of the EU on the issue of sustainable finance”.

Steve Waygood, chief responsible investment officer at Aviva Investors, said the UK should implement the EU’s “world-leading” framework and aim to go further “to ensure that London remains a global green finance hub”.

Failing to follow the EU could “inadvertently undermine consumer interest in financing a transition toward a more sustainable economy”, he said. For example, UK investors could miss out on the opportunity their EU counterparts will have to inform their financial adviser of their ESG preferences before investing.

UKSIF, whose members also include Schroders, Standard Life Aberdeen and M&G, said it was concerned about the operational difficulties that the UK’s position would introduce for global asset managers by forcing them to navigate clashing regulatory regimes from next year.

“Asset managers need time to adapt to any forthcoming regulatory change,” said Mr Nelmes. “Having to apply sustainable regulatory requirements for their EU business but not for their UK business creates complexity for them.”

The Treasury said that while it recognised the importance of “a globally consistent approach” to sustainability standards, including with the EU, it wanted to “ensure that any standards are appropriate for UK-based firms”. It added that it was considering the EU’s ESG disclosure requirements and would set out further detail “in due course”.